Welcome to Slash Forward. Today we’re
going to ponder a scenario that is likely
better left to the imagination. So, imagine
if you will, moving out to the country with
dreams of becoming a small town physician
only to discover the market has evaporated,
you didn’t spend enough to get a good inspection
on your new home, and you’re living directly in
the middle of a prime spider orgy melting pot that
consists of a highly aggressive and organized,
previously undescribed Venezuelan murder spider
linking up with the most robust local variety.
As pets begin to go missing and people around town
begin dying mysteriously, you find yourself unable
to mount a solid investigation or elicit any
sort of cooperation due to your lack of social
currency. As a true arachnophobe, when things do
go well, the ultimate solution ends up being the
worst possible scenario that could be created
for you. What options would be open to you,
when mother nature herself has decided to hit
the self-destruct button? Is there even enough
fire available, and would it burn at a sufficient
heat to rid the town of this scourge? In order to
try to figure this all out, we’re going to
summon our courage and be brave and examine
the 1990 creature-feature Arachnophobia. Yes, we
have to do it, I’ve already watched the movie.
Be sure to keep your eyes peeled for any missed
opportunities and leave a comment with any tips
or tricks you have developed for managing spider
situations in your personal life. Let’s get to it.
We open over a rainforest at dusk, and take a
trip down the lazy river. Deep in the heart of the
forest Mr. Manley is eventually delivered to Dr.
Atherton’s camp. Arriving late, he is immediately
whisked off toward the wilderness. He’s tasked
with photographing their venture into a Tpui
On the way in, Manley is provided the helpful
warning that much of the fauna here would desire
to digest his nutrient rich flesh (pink something,
but may have already put this elsewhere?) So
it’s best to try not to touch or be touched by
anything...in the dense Venezuelan rainforest.
We get some big Jurassic Park vibes as they
touch down near a lush sinkhole. The equipment
is lowered to the bottom as they prepare to hike
it - guideless, as the tribesman who has agreed to
assist them only promised to take them as far as
the trailhead, apparently. Well, thanks I guess.
They reunite with their equipment and Manley
faceplants his way into a terrible discovery,
which is brushed off as they proceed deep
into the bellybutton of the wilderness.
They find a nice, big tree and
begin setting up. The plan?
Smoke ‘em if you got ‘em! They don’t have
to wait long before untold quantities of
specimens rain down on them, with about 10%
actually landing in the jars they set up.
As they sift through, greedy for new discoveries,
they hear some louder thuds and find a collection
of big honkin’ spiders. They’re amazed to find
that they survived the smokeshow, so they
snag a couple of samples plus one stowaway.
Back at camp it’s discovered that these are
soldier spiders - they have no reproductive
organs, and likely serve a single General.
Fascinating as this all is, Manley needs to
go try to nap off his fever. Unfortunately,
he has an unwelcome bedfellow which sinks its
bite-things into him, exacerbating his already
present illness to a significant degree. When he
is found, they presume he succumbed to his fever,
allowing them to proceed with a clean conscience.
With no reverence for the empty shell, they
strip his belongings of any valuable filmstock
and send his empty meat suit back stateside
in a shipping crate sans packing materials,
but with one more spider
than is typically desirable.
On the other side of the water we catch up
with the hearse as it delivers him to a simple,
smalltown funeral home. Irv cracks the top and
then makes a quick call about the open casket
situation. You see, big Roy’s taken advantage of
the long trip over to turn Manley into his own,
personal Bento box. He then shuffles
out, scaring off the domestics,
before being granted fast travel by
a passing crow. He manages to end the
livery service right near an old barn right
as the Jennings roll up to their new home.
Here we meet Ross, who has arrived in
Canaima with his family to raise his
children in a nurturing environment, take over
the practice of the soon-to-retire town physician,
and to find enough space to stretch out and
build a bitchin wine cellar. Tom rushes out
to complain that there’s a spider on his stuff.
In this household, it's the wife's duty to handle
these situations, so Molly gently removes the
spider and gives her a new home in the barn.
That evening, the couple briefly discusses
their anxieties and expectations around
their new life away from the city,
and provide each other carnal comfort
while barnside a couple of new acquaintances
come together in similar, sensual pleasure.
The next day we find Ross in dire straits
- old man Metcalf has thought it over
and decided that he wants to postpone his
retirement. To add to this, Sheriff Parsons
declines to show the reverence Ross feels
is owed to the new hot-shot young doctor.
Ms. Hollins comes to his rescue, helping him
navigate the town politics and, recognizing the
need for some fresh blood in the medical field,
offers to be his first patient. Sure enough,
utilizing more recent medical information,
he is able to take her off her hypertension
medication as it’s not recommended based on her
results. Margaret then offers to throw Ross an
open house to help him meet and network with
the townsfolk and build up his patient base.
Meanwhile, bored at home, Molly decides
to scope out their fully-furnished barn
to see if she can get any good shots.
Here she finds nature hard at work,
and becomes enamoured with its
boundless majesty - beautiful.
That evening, Molly suggests Ross face down this
web as a form of acclimation therapy to get over
his fear of spiders. On the way out we learn that
his crippling fear stems from his first memory
as a baby. A disgusting, hairy spider invaded
his crib and crawled all over his helpless body,
instilling in him an instinct to freeze in
response to a spider’s threat. Regardless,
he climbs the ladder and takes a
face shot from a dessicated rat,
and the couple runs off giggling
while a bubbling mass throbs nearby.
The next day we see that there are party’s all
over town - Ross is busy trying to get between the
bluehairs and their lust for deviled eggs so he
can talk medical conditions and their treatment.
While back at the barn, the broodlings are
absolutely popping off and venturing into the
surrounding areas. As the guests filter out, and
Margaret basks in the glow of a successful party,
an unassuming arachnid lies in wait. It seeks
to grow fat on the housecat’s sweet juices.
Unfortunately, after being put out, Ms. Hollins
is now the only animal left in the house.
The next day, while working in the cellar, Ross
discovers why it’s worth spending a bit extra
on an experienced home inspector. Molly offers
to call the exterminator if Ross goes to check
on Margaret who she can’t reach. When he gets
there, the paper is uncollected and the cat is
still outside. In the aftermath, Metcalf declares
her dead by heart attack, which they blame on Ross
taking her off her meds. With no authority
or influence, Ross is unable to compel them
to conduct an autopsy to be sure. However,
in a positive turn of events, Mr. Beechwood
takes pity on Ross and requests he come by the
gym later so he can throw him some business.
We then get the pleasure of meeting Delbert, who
arrives at the Jennings residence to assess their
termite problem. The main points to take
away here are that Delbert’s a goofball,
as implied by his musical accompaniment .
And also that aside from the rotted wood,
he curiously doesn’t find any
actual presence of termites.
While this is going down, Ross arrives at the
gym. He and Henry exchange pleasantries about
rural life, but also note the recent, conspicuous
absence of crickets singing their evening song.
Then Ross heads down the line, cupping some
sacks and making himself a quick 50 bucks.
Afterward at practice, we see the brood has been
spreading through town, with one soldier even
finding its way into Miller’s helmet. So, as the
boys run a play action nickel with an audible,
Miller ends up going down and declines to get
back up. Ross sets aside his notations of scrotal
tenacity to rush out and provide aid. But after
missing the spider when it casually saunters
out of the helmet, they’re left holding their
own scrotes wondering what the hell happened.
We learn later that this series of events has
earned Ross the unfortunate moniker Dr. Death.
Lamenting the recent misfortune
brought upon them by his upstart rival,
Metcalf decides to relax by slipping his slender
hog into the comforting warmth of his loafers,
but gets bit. He is immediately thrown into
a sizeable seizure, providing the key bit of
evidence he would need to try to crack
this thing wide open - except he’s DOA.
However, with him now out of the way,
Ross is able to convince the county
coroner to perform an autopsy. Although
as the town’s new physician by default,
Ross barely has a chance to follow up on it.
When complete, the coroner does confirm a minute
amount of an unidentified toxin was found in
Metcalf’s system. With something to go on,
Ross calls for some exhumations
to gather additional evidence.
In the meantime, he does warn the family to be
wary of the dangers of spiders and the importance
of steering clear of those you see. He then does
research into the night, and falls victim to a
rabid cricket attack - a lone survivor of the
unseen spider-cricket war happening all around
him. While he’s busy diddling that one, a couple
of boss spiders pull an egg sack into his cellar.
His research leads him to Dr. Atherton - the
top man on the west coast whose curiosity is
piqued when the town named Canaima holds some
vague recognition in the back of his mind.
So he sends his assistant Collins to check
it out, and he is lucky to arrive just in
time for them to start examining some rotting
corpses. Before he can step out for a quick puke,
they find bite marks on each of the
bodies. The next step would be quarantine,
but this exceeds his authority, so he calls Dr.
Atherton to confirm his expertise is required.
The next day a crack team of arthropod
enthusiasts enter Margaret’s home to
search out the culprit. With evidence
that it’s set up shop in the backyard,
they know they’re closing in. As they ponder
this, Lloyd finds the prize in his cereal box.
Since the preference would be to find a live
one, they continue on and do eventually end up
in a staring contest with the harbinger of
their doom. Collins convinces Ross to run a
distraction so he can nab it, as if it doesn’t
have an abundance of eyes. But it does work.
Meanwhile, at the Beechwood residence,
the spiders are practically having a party
as one uses the playful tickling of the water to
blend in and descend Becky’s torso. The end result
is a post-puberty nightmare. They call in Delbert
for an emergency extraction of the pests and, upon
running across one on the back deck, he finds this
breed to be remarkably impervious to the typical
spray formula. But he always has the boot as a
back up. Del then saunters off like a true badass.
Atherton finally shows up and learns that Ross has
connected the dots for him between the excursion
in Venezuela and Manley the photographer,
who was a resident of their town. They then
inspect the specimen’s triple sacks and test its
venom, which has an alarmingly immediate effect.
Atherton then lays it all out - these dickless
soldiers are part of a highly organized colony,
the likes of which have only been seen
in the Venezuelan sample. It’s an apex
species led by a general dickslanger that,
in this environment, is no longer bound by
geography. If the queen is able to finish a
breeding cycle, the outcome will be a whole
host of child-bearing offspring that will look
to expand out to new territory, so game over.
They presume the point of origin to be the
mortuary where the casket was received. And,
since Irv has the phone off the hook, they posse
up. We find Irv in a social media blackout so he
and his wife can enjoy Wheel of Fortune -
a tradition that severely dates this movie.
Along the way, Collins discusses the ideal
nest location I like the cut of your jib,
my friend Where do I sign up? But, by the time
they arrive, the Kendall's have been sucked dry.
When Atherton goes to leave the office,
Molly’s photography sets him off in a
different direction. He and Lloyd roll up
to the barn and, luckily, he brought a jar
so they should be all good. Atherton sends Lloyd
off to fetch the others. Except after failing to
find the nest, they’ve already figured out the
correct location based on the radius of initial
victims. As they drive in that direction, Delbert
points out that the barn is not ideal for a nest.
But he’s casting his pearls before swine
as they dismiss his valuable input.
Back at the barn, Atherton bafflingly enters the
den and rings the dinner bell, ultimately reaping
what he sows. Then the trio arrives and Delbert
uncorks his private stock of insecticide, made of
his own formula that proves to be fairly caustic.
He employs it as the others go to check the house.
Ross ventures in real slow and quiet like,
creeping out his family in the process.
Then they find a real good reason to be creeped
out, and are forced to take to the stairs to hide.
Unfortunately, doors are essentially useless
in this scenario as their assailants file
in through every crack and crevice, looking to
find warmth in all of their cracks and crevices.
As they exit, Ross delays too long, forcing
him back into the house. Delbert tries to
work his way in from the outside
as Ross takes the elevator down.
Unfortunately he pressed the button
for the basement rather than the lobby.
Now every itch feels like spiders to
him, but the area is actually relatively
arachnid-free - due to the presence of the
queen, of course. He attempts to excuse himself,
but is relentlessly pursued. Despite the size
differential, he can barely do more than flaccidly
swat at her. But then she surprises him into
scream-tossing his shovel into the breaker box.
He then searches for and finds the egg sack, which
is pulsating in a rhythmically seductive way.
He goes to innocently burn it to a crisp
when the General rears his ugly head.
Ross ends up stuck under what must be a
full ten to fifteen pounds of wine rack,
but he manages to get out
somehow and chases him down
with a makeshift flamethrower - and dammit
if he doesn’t start having some fun with it.
He listens acutely for any movement, and
readies himself. But is not ready enough.
In the ensuing struggle he ends up supine
with that hairy bitch crawling up his leg,
reverting him to a baby-like state in which he
is frozen in fear. He uses a wayward stick to
catapult the General across the room, and
then pulls off a lucky nail gun shot that
sends him into the nest - annihilating
the entire species - a truly sad story.
As we close the movie, we find this all to
have been an indictment of country living
as they happily settle back into their San
Francisco apartment, never addressing the
question of how they’re going to raise their kids
in the city. And then nature gets the last laugh.
That was an effective and harrowing horror
movie, despite the attempts to lighten the tone.
I would love to know in the comments if
you can think of any horror movie that
has since presented such a specific
and simple threat as effectively.
As we now move to examine the most
practical strategies for survival,
I think it’s important to first acknowledge
the ways in which different types of people
may respond to this type of scenario in very
different ways. To do that, we’re going to
take a moment to review the impact evolution has
on some of our responses to specific dangers.
Deep down somewhere in the depths of our
brains, possibly in the pre-primate portions,
lurks a natural instinct to avoid sudden and
unexpected dangers. It’s what helps animals
survive in the wilderness and, in certain cases,
it is most effectively employed in the avoidance
of very specific hazards. As an illustrative
example, let's take a moment to enjoy the
feline involuntary response to an unexpected
cucumber. The sudden appearance invokes a
deeply ingrained response cats have learned to
exhibit when presented with serpentine threats.
I have my own anecdotal experience of a similar
type. Once, after returning home from a road trip,
I was walking by my rental car when some slender
little finger-like legs started reaching out from
the wheel well. I caught this only out of the
corner of my eye and instantly jumped sideways
away from the car. When I looked over, I saw that
a praying mantis had hitched a ride from somewhere
and was now checking out its new environment.
The thing is, as soon as I saw what it was,
all the adrenaline and anxiety that had
instantaneously gripped me had washed away.
There was something instinctual, specifically
about the spider possibility, that prompted an
automatic response from my body. This is something
to consider as we discuss our options, but is also
important to acknowledge in that it’s exhibited
behaviorally in the movie. One of the lovers of
high school football practice had an instinctual
response to spider presence without ever even
seeing it. Collins does point out, when he’s
trying to convince Ross to help him, that we have
a particular neural transmitter designed to help
us move past the fear, but it also seems a healthy
dose of fear is a benefit in terms of survival.
This is somewhat confirmed by Ross defeating the
queen by way of an impulsive fear response. In
addition, it should be noted that the converse
could get you in more trouble as those among us
who are disinclined to fear spiders also seem
more likely to want to give them a hug and cuddle
instead, which is not recommended in this case.
Considering that, let’s take a look at
a few key points of interest here. Now,
the obvious first step is to decline
to go where one doesn’t belong or bring
things that don’t belong back to other
areas. The problem is that Dr. Atherton,
as is likely the case with many scholars looking
to make a name for themselves in their field,
is just too thirsty for knowledge and the prestige
that comes with novel discovery. This is not
balanced sufficiently with a similarly robust
reverence for the destructive power of nature.
As an example, as you go to seek out your tpui,
if the locals are unwilling to go to a place,
you should probably avoid those places. Or, at
the very least, you could inquire as to what
legends or folklore have caused them to take
their current position to get a better idea of
what you’re walking into. Because, it’s certainly
not the butterflies that are the problem here.
This is further compounded with the method by
which they gather their samples. The departure
of their guide is accentuated when Manley sticks
his face in a web of a sufficient size to require
taking a pause and a consult before moving
forward. Despite this they do what they came
for and greedily collect their precious samples
in a way that demonstrates a wanton disregard
for the sanctity of nature. You really
are asking for it when you drop a fat
deuce on mother earth...figuratively,
it’s pretty much impossible to avoid
literally deucing on the earth, and in
many ways is actually, very helpful.
But that’s just a cautionary tale. Most of us
are not going to the Venezuelan rainforest,
nor are we returning with unregistered biological
material. So, we should really be focusing our
energies on what to do in a domestic situation
in which a threat currently exists. The first,
obvious answer, if you live in the sort of area
with sizable spiders, is to keep your eyes open
at all times. Sometimes the upper corners of
rooms do surprise us, because we’re used to
having a central focus at eye level or below. But
it’s always a good idea to take a glance about to
verify what’s lurking just outside your field
of view. This would have been of great benefit
in the shower especially where the water source
itself was engulfed in webbing. As paranoid as
checking everywhere for spiders all the time may
seem, it’s doubly important in this scenario,
because you’re going to be removing your clothes.
Aside from the easy access to biteable areas,
having a large insect on your naked body only
ensures some deep, emotional scars to go along
with any physical injuries you may sustain. There
are also a variety of simple, daily preparations
like shaking out your clothes before putting
them on, and storing your shoes upside down.
But then, if an engagement is unavoidable, you
have to engage in the correct way. It doesn’t
actually bother me at all that insecticides don’t
work, because I don’t really abide by poisons. If
you put out some rat poison, or spray a cockroach
with some severe chemical that doesn’t work,
then you just have a chemical coated, angry
insect residing with you in some hidden location,
tracking it’s nasty chemicals all over
or, especially bad in the case of the rat,
dying later in a hidden location you can’t get to.
Now you’re living in filth. No, once
you go in, it’s time to go all in.
Of course, the goal is still to minimize
the risk of physical contact. Because it’s
equally awkward to injure but not kill
some large crawly thing that then runs
off somewhere hidden to plot its revenge. Who
hasn’t ended a standoff with an encyclopedia,
only to return sometime later to clean up and
find no bug carcass underneath. That’s terrifying.
As an example we’ll review the strategy Ross
used against the coat hook shadow in his
bedroom at night. This is a safe one, because it
wasn’t actually a giant spider, so we don’t have
to worry. Now, if you even suspect a spider of
anywhere near this size, why do you have a rolled
up magazine? The primary goal should be to kill it
in a way that pins it to its location to ensure it
doesn’t skitter away or circle back on you, but
from a sufficient distance that you have time
for a second chance should you fail in the first.
There is a proportional relationship between the
size and danger of the insect in question and
how long your device should be. In this case,
I’m thinking a closet rod...possibly the
backside of an emptied drawer from your dresser.
The key is to be creative, and few things promote
innovative problem solving like fear of death.
Using a shorter melee weapon
could be okay in some scenarios,
like using the towel against the
horde at the end. In this case,
you’re alive through sheer luck anyway.
You’re not facing down an individual enemy
lying in wait and intending to kill it, you’re
just trying to keep them away from your skin.
Although, this rule would still apply if
you intend to capture rather than kill,
like during the face off. This bitch
is staring directly into your face and
matching your movement. A wine glass is
insufficient in that it requires you to
get too close to realistically
secure a successful capture.
Really we’re establishing the importance of
keeping an appropriate distance. Your enemy
is smaller and quicker. You are going to want to
leave yourself some lead time to get out of its
way and avoid it. For instance, after all Ross
had been through, was he so full of himself,
so confident in his own abilities, that he would
search for the General by putting his face up to
the various places he thought it might be hiding?
Who among us, when tracking a large, bug surprise,
would get their face this close to where you
suspect the bug may be? This is ludicrous.
Moving one level higher, there
are broader concerns at play here.
Aside from managing the 1v1, you still have to
come up with viable strategies for taking down
the brood as a whole. Luckily, due to the
short life span of the sexless soldiers,
this mostly revolves around finding the nest and
ensuring the queen doesn’t get a chance to mate,
which happens to be one of my specialties.
The first step is to not enter the barn.
If you do, certainly don’t go into the
midst of their feeding den. The threat
is somewhat known, but somewhat unknown.
Why prompt it to come to you rather than
pursue it after ascertaining its location?
What was the plan here? He knows the soldiers are
fast and quick to bite, and I’ve rarely seen a
man more pink and delicious than Atherton
here. You stay back and stick together.
Approach the house quickly if there are no signs
of danger and make your intent known to the family
immediately. Call them to you and usher them
away. Be wary, but don’t hesitate, and there
is no reason to seek out individual spiders
here. The main goal is safety and containment.
This is why the most obvious final solution
is fire. If you’ve ever seen the clock spider
picture, my initial instinct when confronted
with that is to deliver a hatchet to the thorax,
then douse the place and light a match. You simply
can’t live there anymore. I know it’s hard
when you’re talking about all your earthly
possessions, but the situation really
does call for fire applied liberally and
indiscriminately. If you want to be
ready to repel your spider overlords,
you have to be prepared to walk away at a
moment’s notice. It’s like Heat, except if
Bobby De Niro were referring to a real-life
prepared response to a spider infestation.
If you do happen to find yourself
in the depths and going toe-to-toe,
this may be the one point where having an
unreasonable affinity toward spiders could
become beneficial. Because this point
is exactly where you would want to have
the courage to begin hugging. Hugging
aggressively for the sake of salvation.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you can
support the channel through donations
or merch. Any donation unlocks uncensored
movie reviews of Lifeforce and Under the Skin,
with others to be added over
time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.